Upgrade to v7.1 database prep details (#5773)
mattermost/docs: source/upgrade/prepare-to-upgrade-mattermost.rst

Prepare to upgrade Mattermost
=============================

|all-plans| |self-hosted|

.. |all-plans| image:: ../images/all-plans-badge.png
  :scale: 30
  :target: https://mattermost.com/pricing
  :alt: Available in Mattermost Free and Starter subscription plans.

.. |self-hosted| image:: ../images/self-hosted-badge.png
  :scale: 30
  :target: https://mattermost.com/deploy
  :alt: Available for Mattermost Self-Hosted deployments.

In most cases, you can upgrade Mattermost Server in a few minutes. However, the upgrade can take longer depending on several factors, including the size and complexity of your installation, and the version that you're upgrading from.

.. contents::
  :backlinks: top
  :local:

Upgrade to Mattermost v7.1
--------------------------

Mattermost v7.1 introduces schema changes in the form of a new column and its index. The following notes our test results for the schema changes:

- MySQL 12M Posts, 2.5M Reactions - ~1min 34s (instance: PC with 8 cores, 16GB RAM)
- PostgreSQL 12M Posts, 2.5M Reactions - ~1min 18s (instance: db.r5.2xlarge)

> Customers wanting an upgrade with substantially reduced downtime (~1/5th of the original time) are encouraged to run the following queries before upgrading. This is fully backwards-compatible, but will obtain a lock on ``Reactions`` table, so users' reactions posted during this time won't be reflected in the database.

Reviewer: What are the impacts of the lock and not posting the reactions when running the queries not in a maintenance window?

Author: @agnivade - Can you help answer Neil's question?

Reviewer 2: @nab-77 - The impact is mentioned - "so users' reactions posted during this time won't be reflected in the database." Let me know if you have any more questions.

This is just like any other schema migration change that we do every release. Some migrations will lock the tables, some won't. When a migration locks a table, nothing gets written to that table during that time.

cc @plant99

Author: @nab-77 - Based on Agniva's input, I've also updated the introductory sentence to remove the specifics about reduced downtime.

Reviewer 3: @nab-77 The data isn't lost because it's not accepted in the first place, it'll be rejected by the database which you'll see reflected in the API response.

> Customers wanting to run the SQL queries beforehand can run the following queries before upgrading. This is fully backwards-compatible and obtains a lock on ``Reactions`` table, so users' reactions posted during this time won't be reflected in the database until the migrations are complete.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
You can run SQL queries before the upgrade to obtain a lock on ``Reactions`` table, so that users' reactions posted during this time won't be reflected in the database until the migrations are complete. This is fully backwards-compatible.
```

> Customers wanting to run the SQL queries before-hand can run the following queries before upgrading. This is fully backwards-compatible and obtains a lock on ``Reactions`` table, so users' reactions posted during this time won't be reflected in the database until the migrations are complete.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Customers wanting to run the SQL queries beforehand can run the following queries before upgrading. This is fully backwards-compatible and obtains a lock on ``Reactions`` table, so users' reactions posted during this time won't be reflected in the database until the migrations are complete.
```

> Customers wanting to run the SQL queries before-hand can run the following queries before upgrading. This is fully backwards-compatible that obtains a lock on ``Reactions`` table, so users' reactions posted during this time won't be reflected in the database until the migrations are complete.

Author: ```suggestion
Customers wanting to run the SQL queries before-hand can run the following queries before upgrading. This is fully backwards-compatible and obtains a lock on ``Reactions`` table, so users' reactions posted during this time won't be reflected in the database until the migrations are complete.
```

.. tabs:: 

  .. tab:: MySQL

    ``ALTER TABLE Reactions ADD COLUMN ChannelId varchar(26) NOT NULL DEFAULT "";``

    ``UPDATE Reactions SET ChannelId = (select ChannelId from Posts where Posts.Id = Reactions.PostId) WHERE ChannelId="";``

    ``CREATE INDEX idx_reactions_channel_id ON Reactions(ChannelId) LOCK=NONE;``

  .. tab:: PostgreSQL

    ``ALTER TABLE reactions ADD COLUMN IF NOT EXISTS channelid varchar(26) NOT NULL DEFAULT '';``

    ``UPDATE reactions SET channelid = (select channelid from posts where posts.id = reactions.postid) WHERE channelid='';``

    ``CREATE INDEX CONCURRENTLY IF NOT EXISTS idx_reactions_channel_id on reactions (channelid);``

Upgrade to Mattermost v7.0
--------------------------

> Self-hosted Mattermost customers using MySQL databases may notice the migration to release v7.0 taking longer than usual when having a large number of rows in ``FileInfo`` table. See the `important upgrade notes <https://docs.mattermost.com/upgrade/important-upgrade-notes.html>`__ documentation for details.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Self-hosted Mattermost customers using MySQL databases may notice the migration to release v7.0 taking longer than usual when there are a large number of rows in the ``FileInfo`` table. See the `important upgrade notes <https://docs.mattermost.com/upgrade/important-upgrade-notes.html>`__ documentation for details.
```

> 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
```

Upgrading from a previous Extended Support Release to the latest Extended Support Release is supported. Upgrading from v5.31 to v5.37 should take roughly the same amount of time as upgrading from v5.31 to v5.35, then upgrading v5.35 to 5.37. However, an upgrade directly from v5.31 to v5.37 could potentially take hours due to the database schema migrations required for v5.35. Review the :doc:`important-upgrade-notes` for all intermediate versions in between to ensure you’re aware of the possible migrations that could affect your upgrade.

v6.0 database schema migrations
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Mattermost v6.0 introduces several database schema changes to improve both database and application performance. The upgrade will run significant database schema changes that can cause an extended startup time depending on the dataset size. We've conducted extensive tests on supported database drivers including MySQL and PostgreSQL, using realistic datasets of more than 10 million posts and more than 72 million posts.

> A migration to v6.0 of 10+ million posts will take approximately 1 hour and 22 minutes to complete for a MySQL database. See the `Mattermost v6.0 DB Schema Migrations Analysis <https://gist.github.com/streamer45/59b3582118913d4fc5e8ff81ea78b055>`__ documentation for test specifications, data sizes, and test results.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
A migration to v6.0 of 10+ million posts will take approximately 1 hour and 22 minutes to complete for a MySQL database. See the `Mattermost v6.0 DB schema migrations analysis <https://gist.github.com/streamer45/59b3582118913d4fc5e8ff81ea78b055>`__ documentation for test specifications, data sizes, and test results.
```

> A large migration from v5.39 to v6.0 of 72+ million posts will take approximately 3 hours and 40 minutes to complete for a MySQL database. See the `Migration Results analysis <https://gist.github.com/streamer45/868c451164f6e8069d8b398685a31b6e>`__ documentation for test specifications, data sizes, and test results.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
A large migration from v5.39 to v6.0 of 72+ million posts will take approximately 3 hours and 40 minutes to complete for a MySQL database. See the `Migration results analysis <https://gist.github.com/streamer45/868c451164f6e8069d8b398685a31b6e>`__ documentation for test specifications, data sizes, and test results.
```

.. tabs::

   .. tab:: MySQL

      The following queries, executed during the migration process on an environment with 10+ million posts, will have a significant impact on database CPU usage and write operation restrictions for the duration of the query:

      ``ALTER TABLE Posts MODIFY Props JSON;`` (~26 minutes)

      ``ALTER TABLE Posts DROP COLUMN ParentId;`` (~26 minutes)

      ``ALTER TABLE Posts MODIFY COLUMN FileIds text;`` (~26 minutes)

>       For a complete breakdown of MySQL queries, as well as their impact and duration, see the `Mattermost v6.0 DB Schema Migrations Analysis <https://gist.github.com/streamer45/59b3582118913d4fc5e8ff81ea78b055#mysql-1>`__ documentation.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
      For a complete breakdown of MySQL queries, as well as their impact and duration, see the `Mattermost v6.0 DB schema migrations analysis <https://gist.github.com/streamer45/59b3582118913d4fc5e8ff81ea78b055#mysql-1>`__ documentation.
```

      **MySQL Mitigation Strategies**

      **Run combined queries prior to the upgrade.**
      The previous queries can be combined when run prior to the upgrade as follows:

      ``ALTER TABLE Posts MODIFY COLUMN FileIds text, MODIFY COLUMN Props JSON;``

      This limits the time taken to that of a single query of that type.

      **Online migration**: An online migration that avoids locking can be attempted on MySQL installations, especially for particularly heavy queries or very big datasets (tens of millions of posts or more). This can be done through an external tool like `pt-online-schema-change <https://www.percona.com/doc/percona-toolkit/LATEST/pt-online-schema-change.html>`__. However, the online migration process can cause a significant spike in CPU usage on the database instance it runs.

>       See the `Mattermost v6.0 DB Schema Migrations Analysis <https://gist.github.com/streamer45/59b3582118913d4fc5e8ff81ea78b055#online-migration-mysql>`__ documentation for a sample execution and additional caveats.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
      See the `Mattermost v6.0 DB schema migrations analysis <https://gist.github.com/streamer45/59b3582118913d4fc5e8ff81ea78b055#online-migration-mysql>`__ documentation for a sample execution and additional caveats.
```

   .. tab:: PostgreSQL

      The following query executed during the migration process will have a significant impact on database CPU usage and write operation restrictions for the duration of the query:

      ``ALTER TABLE posts ALTER COLUMN props TYPE jsonb USING props::jsonb;`` (~ 11 minutes)

>       For a complete breakdown of PostgreSQL queries, as well as their impact and duration, see the `Mattermost v6.0 DB Schema Migrations Analysis <https://gist.github.com/streamer45/59b3582118913d4fc5e8ff81ea78b055#postgresql-1>`__.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
      For a complete breakdown of PostgreSQL queries, as well as their impact and duration, see the `Mattermost v6.0 DB schema migrations analysis <https://gist.github.com/streamer45/59b3582118913d4fc5e8ff81ea78b055#postgresql-1>`__.
```

Upgrade from releases older than v5.35
----------------------------------------

> Customers upgrading from a release older than Mattermost v5.35 should expect extended downtime when upgrading to v6.0 due to the introduction of backend database architecture introduced in v5.35. This upgrade path isn't recommended for large installations. We recommend upgrading to the latest `Extended Support Release (ESR) <https://docs.mattermost.com/upgrade/extended-support-release.html>`__ first before upgrading to Mattermost v6.0. See the `Mattermost Changelog <https://docs.mattermost.com/install/self-managed-changelog.html>`__ documentation for additional details.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Customers upgrading from a release older than Mattermost v5.35 should expect extended downtime when upgrading to v6.0 due to the introduction of backend database architecture introduced in v5.35. This upgrade path isn't recommended for large installations. We recommend upgrading to the latest `Extended Support Release (ESR) <https://docs.mattermost.com/upgrade/extended-support-release.html>`__ first before upgrading to Mattermost v6.0. See the `Mattermost changelog <https://docs.mattermost.com/install/self-managed-changelog.html>`__ documentation for additional details.
```

    ALTER TABLE jobs ALTER COLUMN data TYPE jsonb USING data::jsonb;
    ALTER TABLE linkmetadata ALTER COLUMN data TYPE jsonb USING data::jsonb;
    ALTER TABLE sessions ALTER COLUMN props TYPE jsonb USING props::jsonb;
    ALTER TABLE threads ALTER COLUMN participants TYPE jsonb USING participants::jsonb;
    ALTER TABLE users ALTER COLUMN props TYPE jsonb USING props::jsonb;
    ALTER TABLE users ALTER COLUMN notifyprops TYPE jsonb USING notifyprops::jsonb;
    ALTER TABLE users ALTER COLUMN timezone TYPE jsonb USING timezone::jsonb;

  Once you've identified the table being affected, verify how many invalid occurrences of `\u0000` you have using the following SELECT query:

  .. code-block:: sh

    SELECT COUNT(*) FROM TableName WHERE ColumnName LIKE '%\u0000%';

  Then select and fix the rows accordingly. If you prefer, you can also fix all occurrences at once in a given table or column using the following UPDATE query:

  .. code-block:: sh

    UPDATE TableName SET ColumnName = regexp_replace(ColumnName, '\\u0000', '', 'g') WHERE ColumnName LIKE '%\u0000%';

Upgrade high availability deployments
---------------------------------------

> In `High Availability <https://docs.mattermost.com/scale/high-availability-cluster.html>`__ environments, you should expect to schedule downtime for the upgrade to v6.0. Based on your database size and setup, the migration to v6.0 can take a significant amount of time, and may even lock the tables for posts which will prevent your users from posting or receiving messages until the migration is complete.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
In `high availability <https://docs.mattermost.com/scale/high-availability-cluster.html>`__ environments, you should expect to schedule downtime for the upgrade to v6.0. Based on your database size and setup, the migration to v6.0 can take a significant amount of time, and may even lock the tables for posts which will prevent your users from posting or receiving messages until the migration is complete.
```

> Ensure you review the `High Availability Cluster Upgrade Guide <https://docs.mattermost.com/scale/high-availability-cluster.html#upgrade-guide>`__, as well as the :doc:`important-upgrade-notes` to make sure you're aware of any actions you need to take before or after upgrading from your particular version.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Ensure you review the `high availability cluster upgrade guide <https://docs.mattermost.com/scale/high-availability-cluster.html#upgrade-guide>`__, as well as the :doc:`important-upgrade-notes` to make sure you're aware of any actions you need to take before or after upgrading from your particular version.
```
